Copywriting 101

												
How to Craft Compelling Copy

CO P Y W R I T I N G 1 0 1 - HOW TO CR A F T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Feel free to email,
tweet, blog, and pass
this exbook around
the web
... but please don’t alter any of its contents
when you do. Thanks!

Copyright © 2020 Copyblogger Media, LLC
All Rights Reserved
copyblogger.com

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Copywriting is one of the most essential elements of effective online
marketing.
The art and science of direct-response copywriting involves
strategically delivering words (whether written or spoken) which get
people to take some form of action.
Copywriters are some of the highest-paid writers in the world, but to
become a truly proficient and profitable copy expert, you’ll need to
invest time and energy in studying the craft.
To truly excel as a copywriter, you may even want to consider
investing in a copywriting course that can provide you more
comprehensive training. If you’d prefer to get started with a free
resource, this ebook is designed to get you up and running with the
basics of writing great copy.
Ready to get started?
Let take a peek behind the curtain, and discover the real “secrets” to
Improving your copywriting skills as a content marketer.

3

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Don’t Read This, or the Kitty
Gets It
by Brian Clark
Poor Fluffy. I asked you not to do this, and you’ve gone and broken
the rules.
Things don’t look good for this cute little kitten I’ve taken hostage in
case my demands were not met. She is awfully sweet, though.
We’ll just have to wait until later on in the chapter to decide the fate
of Fluffy. But first, we really do need to discuss the ultimate goal of
good copywriting.
Stick with me and I’ll go easy on the cat. Deal?
Let’s get started. What is the primary purpose of any piece of writing
that you put out online — whether a blog post, a networking email, a
sales letter or a tutorial?
For starters, to get what you’ve written read, right?
Makes sense.

4

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

So, what’s the primary purpose of your headline, your graphics, your
fonts, and every other part of the content?
The simple, surprising answer is…

To get the first sentence read.
This may seem somewhat simplistic to you, or maybe even
confusing. I came across this way of looking at copywriting later
in my studies. I had spent plenty of time trying to master the art of
writing a perfect headline, or properly conveying product benefits, or
learning how to craft a compelling call to action.
But it all came together for me when legendary copywriter and
direct marketer Joe Sugarman shared his secret for becoming a
great copywriter:

Every element of copy has just one
purpose — to get the first sentence read.
In his seminars, Sugarman would quiz his students on the purpose of
various copy elements: the headline, the graphics, the sub-headlines,
etc. Why are they important?

5

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

“What is the purpose of a headline?” Sugarman would ask.
Every time the student started with some complicated, jargon-filled
explanation, he would cut them off.
“The purpose is to get the first sentence read,” he would counter.
“And the purpose of the first sentence is to get the second sentence
read,” he continued.
And so on, down a slippery slide that leads to your offer and the sale.
This is an extremely valuable way to go about structuring any writing,
and it’s crucial to writing intended to persuade or sell. Many times we
find ourselves so eager to arrive at our conclusion that we forget that
the essence of making a persuasive point (or causing any action) is
how we get there.
Step by step.

6

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Now … how do we get there?
With this simple framework in mind, the stage is set for drilling down
deeper into the nitty gritty of the “step by step.” We’re now in a better
position to more fully appreciate the specific techniques that apply
to all of the various elements of strong copy.
For example, we can now see:
• Why a strong, compelling headline is critical
• Why immediately focusing on the benefit to the reader is so 		
crucial
• Why you must make a promise to the reader that you later 		
fulfill, and
• Why you must back up everything you’ve said with very 			
specific proof.

7

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

If no one reads, all is lost.
And the key to getting someone to read is one sentence at a time, so
compelled by that sentence that they want to read the next. In other
words, how you say it is how you get there.
And while I did get you to read this entire chapter, I wouldn’t exactly
recommend the strategy employed here. It worked, but pulling
cheap stunts like this won’t help you in the long run.
Besides … my four year old daughter staged a daring rescue of the
kitten when I wasn’t looking.
Kids!

8

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

To Be, or Not to Be
Now that’s a question.
The first six words of Hamlet’s Act III, Scene 1 soliloquy are without
doubt the most famous line William Shakespeare ever wrote. It’s also
one of the most recognizable quotes in the English-speaking world.
And not a single word over three letters long.
The lesson? Keep it simple. Good copy is written in clear, concise,
simple words that get your point across. It’s conversational.
You can also fracture the occasional rule of grammar, if it helps
to make your writing more digestible. Sentence fragments, onesentence paragraphs, beginning with conjunctions and ending in
prepositions are all fine, even desirable.
And don’t forget to use plenty of bullets and numbered lists. Think
your audience is too sophisticated for this? Don’t be so sure.
A recent study shows that more than 50 percent of students at fouryear schools and more than 75 percent at two-year colleges in the
United States could not:

9

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Interpret a table about exercise and blood pressure;
• Understand the arguments of newspaper editorials; or
• Compare credit card offers with different interest rates and 		
annual fees.
The bad news is that these kids are more literate than the average US
adult, which is not that surprising considering that the vast majority
of US adults have less education.
So … keep it simple and clear. No one will ever complain that your
writing is too easy to understand.

10

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

How to Write Headlines That Work
Your headline is the first (and perhaps only) impression you make
on a prospective reader. Without a headline or post title that turns a
skimmer into a reader, the rest of your words may as well not even
exist.
But a headline can do more than simply grab attention. A great
headline can also communicate a full message to its intended
audience, and it absolutely must lure the reader into your body text.
At its essence, a compelling headline must promise some kind of
benefit or reward for the reader, in trade for the valuable time it takes
to read more.
In The Copywriter’s Handbook, copywriter Bob Bly sets forth eight
time-tested headline categories that compel action and rake in sales:
• Direct Headlines go straight to the heart of the matter, 			
without any attempt at cleverness. Bly gives the example 			
of Pure Silk Blouses – 30 Percent Off as a headline that 			
states the selling proposition directly. A direct 					
blog post title might read Free SEO E-book.

11

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• An Indirect Headline takes a more subtle approach. It uses 		
curiosity to raise a question in the reader’s mind, which 			
the body copy answers. Often a double meaning is utilized, 		
which is useful online. An article might have the headline Fresh
Bait Works Best and yet have nothing to do with fishing, 			
because it’s actually about writing timely content that acts as 		
link bait.
• A News Headline is pretty self-explanatory, as long as the 		
news itself is actually, well … news. A product announcement, 		
an improved version, or even a content scoop can be the basis
of a compelling news headline. Think Introducing Flickr 2.0 or
My Exclusive Interview With Steve Jobs.
• The How-to Headline is everywhere, online and off, for one 		
reason only – it works like a charm. Bly says, “Many advertising 		
writers claim if you begin with the words how to, you can’t 		
write a bad headline.” An example would be, umm… oh yes… 		
the title of this section of the book.
• A Question Headline must do more than simply ask a 			
question, it must be a question that, according to Bly, the 			
reader can empathize with or would like to see answered. 		
He gives this example from Psychology Today: Do You 			

12

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Close the Bathroom Door Even When You’re the Only 			
One Home? Another example used in Internet marketing 			
guru-ville is Who Else Wants to Get Rich Online?
• The Command Headline boldly tells the prospect what he 		
needs to do, such as Exxon’s old Put a Tiger in Your Tank 			
campaign. Bly indicates that the first word should be a strong 		
verb demanding action, such as Subscribe to Copyblogger 		
Today!
• Another effective technique is called the Reason Why 			
Headline. Your body text consists of a numbered list of product
features or tips, which you then incorporate into the headline, 		
such as Two Hundred Reasons Why Open Source Software 		
Beats Microsoft. It’s not even necessary to include 				
the words “reasons why.” This technique is actually the 			
underlying strategy behind the ubiquitous blogger “list” posts, 		
such as 8 Ways to Build Blog Traffic.

13

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Finally, we have the Testimonial Headline, which is highly 		
effective because it presents outside proof that you offer 			
great value. This entails taking what someone else has 			
said about you, your product or service, and using their 			
actual words in your headline. Quotation marks let the reader 		
know that they are reading a testimonial, which will continue 		
in the body copy. An example might be “I Read Copyblogger 		
First Thing Each Morning,” admits Angelina Jolie.
Hey, we can dream, can’t we?
Next, let’s take a look at why headlines are so important (with some
surprising statistics and stories) and get more tips on how to improve
your headlinewriting skills.

14

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Writing Headlines That Get
Results
It’s no surprise to discover that one of the most popular blog posts
Brian Clark ever wrote for Copyblogger was How to Write Headlines
That Work.
Every copywriter and every journalist knows the importance of a
powerful headline, and that awareness has spilled into the business
blogosphere, where everyone is a bit of a copywriter and a bit of a
journalist.
Despite that, many still underestimate just how important headlines
are. So here are some anecdotes, facts, and guidelines that can help
you write even better headlines (and also let you know how much
you should focus on them).

The 50/50 Rule of Headlines
According to some of the best copywriters of all time, you should
spend half of the entire time it takes to write a piece of persuasive
content on the headline. So if you have a blog post that is really
important to you or your business, one that you really want people
to read, you should downright obsess over your post title.

15

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Advertising legend David Ogilvy knew the power of headlines, and
how the headline literally determined whether the advertisement
would get read. He rewrote this famous headline for an automobile
advertisement 104 times:
At 60 miles an hour, the only thing you hear in the new Rolls Royce
is the ticking of the dashboard clock …
Master copywriter Gene Schwartz often spent an entire week on
the first 50 words of a sales piece — the headline and the opening
paragraph. Those 50 words are the most important part of any
persuasive writing, and writing them well takes time.
Even for the masters.

The 80/20 Rule of Headlines
Here are some interesting statistics.
On average, 8 out of 10 people will read headline copy, but only
2 out of 10 will read the rest. This is the secret to the power of the
headline, and why it so highly determines the effectiveness of the
entire piece.

16

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The better the headline, the better your odds of beating the averages
and getting what you’ve written read by a larger percentage of
people.
Writing a great headline doesn’t guarantee the success of your
writing. The benefit conveyed in the headline still needs to be
properly satisfied in the body copy, either with your content or your
offer.
But great body content with a bad or even marginal headline is
doomed to go unread.

How to Write a Great Headline
In the last section of this ebook, we looked at the different categories
of headlines that work. Now we’ll look at analytical techniques for
producing great headlines.
The copywriting trainers at American Writers & Artists teach The Four
U’s approach to writing headlines.
Headlines, subheads and bullets should:

17

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Be USEFUL to the reader,
• Provide him with a sense of URGENCY,
• Convey the idea that the main benefit is somehow UNIQUE; 		
and
• Do all of the above in an ULTRA-SPECIFIC way.
Copywriter Clayton Makepeace says to ask yourself six questions
before you start to write your headline:
• Does your headline offer the reader a reward for reading?
• What specifics could you add to make your headline more 		
intriguing and believable?
• Does your headline trigger a strong, actionable emotion the 		
reader already has about the subject at hand?
• Does your headline present a proposition that will instantly 		
get your prospect nodding his or her head?
• Could your headline benefit from the inclusion of a proposed
transaction?

18

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Could you add an element of intrigue to drive the prospect 		
into your opening copy?
Makepeace’s six questions combined with the basic structure of
The Four U’s provide an excellent framework for writing spectacular
headlines. Note that just about any headline which satisfies the
framework will fall into one of the eight categories you learned in the
last section.
It takes work and focus, but the effort will make you a more popular
blogger and a more profitable businessperson.

19

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The Structure of Persuasive
Copy
We’ve seen that the purpose of each element of copy is designed to
get the first sentence read, then from there keep the reader engaged
step by step to the conclusion. We know to keep things clear,
concise and simple so that our writing communicates with ease.
And we definitely understand the make-or-break importance of an
attentiongrabbing headline.
So … how do we then structure our content to be persuasive?
Good content structure is never written in stone, but persuasive
copy will do certain things and contain certain elements time and
time again. Whether you’re writing a sales page, long blog post, or
promotional ebook, the flow will determine effectiveness.
Here are some guidelines:
• First of all, focus on the reader – make an important promise 		
early on (with your headline and opening paragraphs) that tells 		
the reader what’s in it for her. Never allow readers to question 		
why they are bothering to pay attention.

20

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Each separate part of your narrative should have a main idea 		
(something compelling) and a main purpose (to rile up 			
the reader, to counter an opposing view, etc) which supports 		
your bigger point and promise. Don’t digress, and don’t ramble.
Stay laser focused.
• Be ultra-specific in your assertions, and always make sure to 		
give “reasons why.” General statements which are unsupported
by specific facts cause a reader’s BS detector to go on high 		
alert.
• Demonstrate large amounts of credibility, using statistics, 		
expert references, and testimonials as appropriate. You must 		
be authoritative – if you’re not an existing expert on 				
a subject, you’d better have done your research.
• After building your credibility and authority, make sure you get
back to the most important person — the reader. What’s STILL 		
in it for him? Restate the hook and the promise that got readers
engaged in the first place.

21

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Make an offer. Whether you’re selling a product or selling 		
an idea, you’ve got to explicitly present it for acceptance by the
reader. Be bold and firm when you present your offer, and 		
relieve the reader’s risk of acceptance by standing behind what
you say.
• Sum everything up, returning full circle to your original 			
promise and demonstrate how you’ve fulfilled it.
• These are some of the key elements of persuasive copy. Use 		
them to provide a “roadmap” to your writing, and you’ll achieve
better results.
Now that you know the basics of creating persuasive copy, let’s
dig into one particular element of copywriting that often trips up
beginners -- features and benefits.

22

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Now Featuring Benefits
One of the most repeated rules of compelling copy is to stress
benefits, not features. In other words, identify the underlying benefit
that each feature of a product or service provides to the prospect,
because that’s what will prompt the purchase.
This is one rule that always applies, except when it doesn’t. We’ll look
at the exceptions in a bit.

Fake Benefits
The idea of highlighting benefits over features seems simple. But it’s
often tough to do in practice.
Writers often end up with fake benefits instead.
Top copywriter Clayton Makepeace asserts that fake benefits will
kill sales copy, so you have to be on the lookout for them in your
writing. He uses this headline as an example:
“Balance Blood Sugar Levels Naturally!”
That sounds pretty beneficial, doesn’t it? In reality, there’s not a
single real benefit in the headline.

23

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

True Benefits
Makepeace advises to apply his patented “forehead slap” test to see
if your copy truly contains a benefit to the reader. In other words,
have you ever woken up from a deep sleep, slapped yourself in
the forehead, and exclaimed								
“Man… I need to balance my blood sugar levels naturally!”
It doesn’t happen. So getting someone to pull out their wallet to buy
that socalled “benefit” will be difficult at best.
Here’s how Makepeace identifies the real benefit hidden in that
headline:
Nobody really wants to balance their blood sugar levels. But anyone
in his or her right mind DOES want to avoid the misery of blindness
… cold, numb, painful limbs … amputation … and premature death
that go along with diabetes.
A high risk person will want to avoid the terrible effects of diabetes.
That is the true benefit that the example product offers.

24

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

How to Extract True Benefits
So, how do you successfully extract true benefits from features?
Here’s a four-step process that works:
• First, make a list of every feature of your product or service.
• Second, ask yourself why each feature is included in the first 		
place.
• Third, take the “why” and ask “how” does this connect with the
prospect’s desires?
• Fourth, get to the absolute root of what’s in it for the prospect
at an emotional level.
Let’s look at a product feature for a fictional News Feed Reader app:
Feature:
“Contains an artificial intelligence algorithm.”
Why it’s there:
“Adds greater utility by adapting and customizing the user’s
information experience.”

25

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

What’s in it for them:
“Keeps the things you read the most at the forefront when you’re in a
hurry.”
Emotional Root:
“Stay up to date on the things that add value to your life and career,
without getting stressed out from information overload.”
Getting to the emotional root is crucial for effective consumer sales.
But what about business prospects?

When Features Work
When selling to business or highly technical people, features alone
can sometimes do the trick. Pandering to emotions will only annoy
them. Besides, unlike consumers (who mostly “want” things rather
than “need” them), business and tech buyers often truly need a
solution to a problem or a tool to complete a task. When a feature is
fairly well known and expected from your audience, you don’t need
to sell it.
However, with innovative features, you still need to move the
prospect down the four-step path. While the phrase “contains an
artificial intelligence algorithm” may be enough to get the Slashdot

26

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

reader salivating, he’ll still want to know how it works and what it
does for him. The What’s in it for me? aspect remains crucial.
For business buyers, you’re stressing “bottom line” benefits from
innovative features. If you can demonstrate that the prospect will be
a hero because your CRM product will save her company $120,000
a year compared to the current customer relationship management
choice, you’ve got a good shot.
While that may seem like a no-brainer purchase to you, you’ll still
need to strongly support the promised benefit with a detailed
explanation of how the features actually deliver. Remember, change
scares the business buyer, because it’s their job or small business on
the line if the product disappoints.

Sell With Benefits, Support With Features
We’re not as logical as we’d like to think we are. Most of our
decisions are based on deep-rooted emotional motivations, which
we then justify with logical processes. So, first help the right brain
create desire, then satisfy the left brain with features and hard data
so that the wallet actually emerges.

27

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Persuading your reader with features and benefits is important -- but
you also need to know how to craft a truly compelling offer. Let’s
look at some guidelines for creating offers in our next section.

“Kids Eat Free” and Other Irresistible
Offers
The sign says it all — “Kids Eat Free Every Monday and Tuesday.” It’s
out in front of a Mexican food restaurant on my way home.
That’s called an offer. It’s not the restaurant’s main offering (which is
trading Mexican food for money). As far as that goes, this is probably
the third best (out of four) Mexican food joints in my hometown.
But every Monday and Tuesday night, the place is packed. They’ve
made an appealing offer that caused people to take action.
“Offer” is a contractual term. It’s an invitation to enter into an
economic relationship, or any relationship really.
The relationship is based on mutual promises. I’ll do this for you if
you give me money or attention or sex or friendship…
If there’s no acceptance of the invitation, there’s no contract and no
relationship.

28

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Uber-marketer Mark Joyner devotes an entire book to the subject of
offers. He demonstrates that hugely successful businesses are built
upon an Irresistible Offer.
Joyner’s work makes great companion reading to Seth Godin’s
All Marketers Are Liars, because both books say the same thing in
different ways.
Formulating an irresistible offer means telling a story that people
want to hear,so they naturally respond.
You must then live the story and fulfill the offer.
It’s helpful to think about offers as coming in two varieties – primary
and promotional. I’ll highlight a couple of Joyner’s favorite irresistible
offers to demonstrate one of each type.

Primary Offers: Federal Express
FedEx is a billion dollar company so essential that corporate
commerce might grind to a halt if they and their progeny ceased
business. The company originated with an idea expressed in a Yale
undergraduate term paper authored by founder Fred Smith, which
according to popular lore received a C from his skeptical professor.

29

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The company filled a huge need at the time, because the
monopolistic United States Postal Service provided unacceptable
results to really important people, mainly on Wall Street. So Fred took
Wall Street’s money and became essential by providing an offer that
couldn’t be refused – guaranteed overnight delivery.
When it absolutely, positively has to be there overnight.
About the only thing this offer doesn’t communicate is price. If the
price wasn’t right, FedEx would not have blasted off; but in the early
days, price wasn’t the first question you asked if it really, absolutely,
positively had to be there the next morning.

Promotional Offers: Domino’s Pizza
Tom Monaghan entered the world of pizza with a single location he
bought in 1960. Pizza is a tough business – it’s the only food item
that has its own category in the Yellow Pages, and there are always
several shops to choose from in any reasonably populated area.
While trying to expand the business, Monaghan faced near
bankruptcy and franchise disputes that almost buried Domino’s. But
one single promotional idea changed everything and put Domino’s
in an overwhelmingly dominant position in this ultra-competitive
field:

30

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

30 minutes or less… or it’s free.
That simple guarantee was explosive. The secret to the offer’s
success resides in the nature of your average tired, hungry, timestrapped citizen. What seems like the safer bet – the tastiest pizza in
town with unpredictable timing, or the pizza that arrives in a half an
hour or else ends up a free meal?
The irony is, back before Domino’s had to discontinue the offer in
1993 due to an auto injury lawsuit, the pizza sucked. Some think it
still does.
Each day, millions of people in more than 60 countries eat Domino’s.

Make an Offer
It’s troubling to see so many entities trying to gain business online,
yet without ever making a compelling offer. There’s no apparent
reason why someone should select you from the overcrowded field,
because often you’ve made no express offer at all.
So many websites assume that a visitor will get the obvious value
that the owner knows he provides. Value is communicated through
offers, however, and those offers must be communicated quickly

31

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

and explicitly. Consider your own surfing habits for a second, and ask
yourself – why would my target audience be any different?
In the lingo of direct-response copywriting, an offer is a call to
action. For bloggers, desired actions include having a reader
subscribe, bookmark you, make comments, respond to surveys,
share your post on social networking sites, and utilize your
information resources that double as sales tools.
Start making offers if you want some action.

32

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

This Ebook Rocks ... 					
I Guarantee It!
There you have it. You just can’t go wrong reading this ebook.
We’ve guaranteed your satisfaction. Those are powerful words, right?
But what does our guarantee really mean? What if you think this
ebook is actually marginal at best? There’s no money to return. And
we can’t give you back your valuable time if you feel it was wasted.
Boy… we’d better make this good.

No Power Without Proof
Advertisements proclaiming “satisfaction guaranteed” are fairly
common – and that’s the problem: the statement can come across
as just another hollow promise, because it often is.
Every promise you make to a prospect should be both fulfilled and
guaranteed. When you sell something in exchange for someone’s
hardearned money, the promise is that the product or service will
meet, or exceed, expectations. The guarantee means you will give
the money back if the buyer feels that’s not actually the case.

33

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The word guarantee is extremely powerful, but only coupled
with evidence of substance. The proof behind the guarantee
accomplishes two things – it demonstrates confidence in your
offering, and relieves the risk to the buyer.

Confidence and Risk
Every contemplated purchase carries risk to the buyer. Before
consumer protection laws, the rule was caveat emptor (let the
buyer beware), and these days buyers are still cautious, even leery –
especially of unknown vendors.
Even when already emotionally and logically committed to what you
have to offer, buyers don’t want to make a mistake. It’s up to you to
help them get over the hump.
The way to get past the buyer’s uncertainty is to first demonstrate
confidence in your offering. Not through boasts or sales prattle, but
with a good old-fashioned, no-questions-asked, “money-wheremy-mouth-is” cash-back guarantee.
Return periods of 30, 60 or 90 days work great. Some direct
marketers go as far as 6 months, a year, or even a lifetime money
back guarantee. The longer the better.

34

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Other techniques involve a “return premium.” The seller allows you
to keep all or part of the materials delivered even after the refund,
or promises to pay you double your money back (or some other
multiple).
Now that’s confidence, and it speaks directly to the buyer’s lingering
reservations.
You’ve now created a risk-free buying environment. Your conversion
of prospects to customers will skyrocket compared to the same
offer, sans guarantee.

Guaranteed Higher Profits
“Whoa there,” many of you are saying, “I can’t do that kind of thing.
It’s way too risky for me.”
Our first response might be to ask you how much faith you have in
your offering. If your faith is lacking, improve your product or service.
As we’ve seen with Domino’s Pizza and Federal Express (see previous
section), the guarantee was the key that made the offers irresistible.

35

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

But you’ve spotted the essence of the technique – you’re taking the
buyer’s risk and shifting it over to yourself. Assuming the faith in your
offering is there, here’s why you shouldn’t be concerned:
First of all, you will get some returns, no matter how much value
you deliver. The reason is that your guarantee will generate a much
higher number of sales. By taking the risk away from the buyer,
invariably you’ll sell to someone who the product wasn’t suited for.
That’s okay; the numbers are working for you.
Your returns will be lower than you think, even among those who
experience buyer’s remorse. We like to remain consistent on a
psychological basis, and our brains work hard to validate our earlier
decisions. Couple that with the ambivalence people experience
when faced with initiating the return process (especially for physical
products), and the sale remains in place.
When it comes to information products, some people will rip you
off. They’ll happily consume the knowledge you offer, and still
demand a refund. If your product is digital, some will share your
hard work with other people, and you won’t make a dime. Don’t
worry about it. Believe it or not, most people are honest. Don’t lose
sleep over those that are not. Your sales (and profits) are up, perhaps
dramatically, because of your guarantee. That was the goal, right?

36

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

There are certainly other methods to keep customers happy and
minimize returns, but the general rule is to always make a strong,
substantive guarantee that actually transfers the reader’s risk back
over to you.
Now that you’re comfortable with the basics of offers, guarantees,
and writing about features vs. benefits, let’s take a look at some
unique ways to write persuasive copy.

37

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

7 Scientifically-Backed
Copywriting Tips
by Gregory Ciotti
Writing persuasive copy is a necessity if you want to sell products,
services, or ideas online.
While great writing is truly an art, those looking to improve their craft
as a copywriter can find a lot of help from behavioral psychology
and neuroscience studies.
The only problem is that good writers are often busy people, and
they don’t have time to slog through dry research papers to find an
interesting nugget or two.
Fortunately, we’ve done the heavy lifting for you, and today you’ll get
to look at 7 fascinating studies on the mind … and see how you can
apply their findings to produce more persuasive copy.
Sound good? Let’s jump in!

38

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

1. Make em’ feel something
Imagine with us, if you will …
You’re watching football, and your team’s quarterback gets slammed
with a bone-crunching tackle, snapping a rib.
Ooh …
Can’t you just feel yourself cringing at the thought?
That’s the power of mirror neurons and how they affect the human
mind.
According to research on the subject, these neurons activate when
you observe something happening, and then transfer some of the
feeling (if it’s powerful enough) on to you.
It’s likely that they’re biologically useful for necessary evolutionary
traits, such as empathy, or “walking in someone else’s shoes.”
Although a majority of the current research on mirror neurons
focuses on literal observation, great writers know that strong
emotions can be conveyed through words as well.

39

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Think about the first example … if you did cringe at the thought of
a man breaking his ribs, you’re already experiencing this effect in
action!
When crafting compelling copy, you have to understand what keeps
your potential reader up at night.
It’s easy for us to write out, “Envision this …,” but it’s not as easy to
get people to care.
You have to speak to a feeling that’s already there -- not try to force
one on your reader.
If you’re selling software that takes the hassle out of content
optimization, you need to speak to the frustrated entreproducer
who’s tired of nitpicking and game-playing for Google, and who
wants to get back to writing.
If you’re selling beer, you need to invoke memories of good times
spent with friends over an ice-cold beverage.
Using this information on mirror neurons to transfer a desired feeling
onto readers is effective, but it’s only going to work if you know what
makes those readers tick.

40

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

2. Be wary of “selling” savings
Here’s something you should know — if you’re using precious real
estate to chest thump about your low prices, you’re doing it wrong.
Not only has research shown us that asking customers to directly
compare prices is a bad idea, but a study from Stanford University
has revealed that that selling “time” is far more effective (for most
businesses) than selling money.
Jennifer Aaker, the lead researcher in the Stanford study, sought to
explain why companies like Miller would use a slogan such as …
It’s Miller Time!
As an inexpensive beer, shouldn’t they be promoting their reasonable
prices instead?
It turns out, no.
A person’s experience with a product tends to foster feelings of
personal connection with it, referring to time typically leads to more
favorable attitudes — and to more purchases.
What does this have to do with writing great copy?

41

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Writing compelling copy helps you speak to what really matters to
your buyer — and that’s their time, troubles, and objectives.
We know that customers are willing to pay more for exceptional
service, but you also need to understand that they’re willing to pay
your prices if you speak to them in a way that shows you value what
they hope to achieve. Your efforts will be perceived as far more
genuine (and effective) than trying to sell them on bottom-dollar
prices.
Or, as Professor Mogliner would put it:
Ultimately, time is a more scarce resource — once it’s gone, it’s gone
— and therefore it’s more meaningful to us.

3. Sweat the small stuff
This is an incredibly important study for copywriters and conversion
experts.
A fascinating piece of research from Carnegie Mellon University was
able to show that the devil really is in the details, especially when it
comes to creating copy which converts.

42

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

In the study, researchers tested how changing a single phrase would
affect conversions over the long haul.
They did this by setting up a free DVD trial program that customers
could sign up for, and testing it between two different phrases …
•“A $5 fee”
•“A small $5 fee”
Here’s the best part:
They found that the second phrase was able to increase signup rates
by over 20%.
The science behind it is actually pretty interesting: researchers found
that this emphasis on the “small” fee made it far easier to deal with
for conservative spenders, also known as “tightwad” customers.
When it comes to great copywriting, however, the lesson is more in
the art of great writing rather than in the “science.”
You must take the time to measure, improve, and track the success
of your craft. Great writers today have no excuses for not testing
their work, so make sure you’re sweating the small stuff and keeping
tabs on how it performs.

43

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

4. Embrace your devilish side
A big mistake that many copywriters make is making little effort to be
authentic.
Everything is high-level: they promise the world, and since many
consumers are hesitant to believe crazy claims, they’re more likely to
glaze over your copy, rather than get swept up by it.
The answer?
Create strong copy that addresses their objections head-on.
You might be familiar with the term “devil’s advocate,” which is when
someone takes a position they don’t inherently agree with in order to
prove a point.
What you might not know is that the Catholic church used to use a
person called the “devil’s advocate” when they canonized someone
into sainthood. Their job was to find flaws with the person so the
debate around them was impartial.
They ended the practice … and with good cause, because you’ll
soon see that playing the devil’s advocate actually enhances the
persuasiveness of the original argument!

44

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

A study by social psychologist Charlan Nemeth was able to show
that arguments framed in the “devil’s advocate” style were more
likely to persuade listeners to support the original argument, rather
than to disagree with it.
Nemeth (and a few other researchers) have concluded that this
occurs because potential flaws and concerns are brought up (and
subsequently addressed) when engaging in the devil’s advocate style,
either by the speaker, or — subliminally — by the listener.
When you’re listening to a persuasive argument and you think to
yourself:
But will that address ____?
… you’re much more likely to be persuaded if the speaker says
something like:
Many of you are probably worried about ____ right now.
… because your concerns are put in the spotlight, instead of being
ignored or swept under the rug.

45

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

So instead of trying to paint a picture of an infallible offer, point out
common concerns that customers may have — then assure them
with facts and evidence that they have nothing to worry about.

5. Don’t rely on adjectives alone
Some writers might not agree with this, but college kids will tell you:
an admissions letter is one of the most stressful pieces of persuasive
copy you can write.
And believe me, it is very much a piece of selling copy — you’re
selling you to some person who decides the fate of your future.
Interestingly enough, in this analysis of persuasive admission letters
— as discussed by the Harvard MBA admissions director who read
them — verbs beat out adjectives more often than not.
Verbs get specific and are harder to ignore, especially in a vain
world where everybody describes themselves with the same trite
adjectives.
How about this example …

46

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

We know this guy Brian who is intelligent, hard-working, and really
insightful.
Big whoop.
Now what if we told you that he founded a successful company, he
created a popular blog, and he leads a talented team.
Much more impressive, right?
Verbs get in your face, and since your competitors will be fluffing
up their copy with adjectives they found in a thesaurus, you can win
people over by describing what you actually do.

6. Include “power” words
Smart copywriters know that there are certain persuasive words that
hold more sway than others.
The top 5 persuasive words are as follows:
•“You” (in actuality, someone’s name, such as when sending an
email newsletter)
• Free

47

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Because
• Instantly
• New
Here’s the breakdown …
“You” – According to research examining brain activation, few things
light us up quite like seeing our own names in print or on the screen.
Our names are intrinsically tied to our self-perception, and we
become more engaged, and even more trusting of a message when
our name appears in it.
Free – Dan Ariely, in his book Predictably Irrational, revealed a study
with chocolate truffles and Hershey’s Kisses that was quite startling:
when the Kisses were advertised as free, people chose them over the
truffles by 38% … despite the fact that most people had chosen the
truffles when the Kisses were just a penny!
Because – In a classic study from Robert Cialdini, the research found
that people were more willing to heed to a request (in this case,
to cut in line) when people used the word “because”… even if the
request was nonsensical (for example, “Can I use the copy machine
first because I need to make a copy?”).

48

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Instantly – We all want things yesterday. According to certain MRI
studies, few words light up our mid-brain quite like those that invoke
a sense of fast reward. Let people know you’ll solve their problems
quickly, and they’ll be more prone to buy.
New – Novelty plays an incredibly important role in activating our
brain’s reward center and in keeping us happy with our purchases.
The research shows that perceived “newness” is important for a
product, but can actually be damaging for a brand (people trust
brands that have been around for a long time).

7. Use transportation for persuasion
Why do good stories consume us so completely?
No other form of writing can keep you up into the wee hours of the
night (willingly!) quite like stories.
According to research from social psychologists Melanie Green
and Timothy Brock, there’s a very simple reason why stories are so
persuasive:
Transportation leads to persuasion.

49

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

People can block out sales pitches, but everybody loves listening to
stories.
Their research shows that stories have a tendency to get in “under
the radar” and transport us to another place; in this place we may
embrace things we’d likely scoff at in the harsh “real world.”
This is great news for those adept at telling an enchanting tale, but
how can the rest of us write more persuasive stories?
According to additional research by the duo, the following tactics
work well:
Detailed imagery: Imagery paints the picture for story. It’s hard to
understand how scary Mordor is without Tolkien giving you detailed
descriptions of the barren landscapes, the looming presence of Mt.
Doom, and the horrifying screams of the Nazgul.
Suspense: How do you get people to finish a story? Leave them
begging to know the end in the very beginning. It’s hard for us to not
finish things that catch our attention, so lead with something exciting
first — not later.
Metaphors and irony: The reason that stories like Animal Farm are
so popular is because they tell a hidden tale through metaphor (such

50

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

as depicting the rise of Stalin). Many good stories include these
elements so that readers will have
“Aha!” moments, allowing them to truly grasp the author’s message.
Modeling: If you’re looking to have someone change a behavior (or
take a desired action), you can “model” the action via a story. When
we listen to transformation tales, we re-imagine ourselves as the
main character, and according to the research, it makes the action
easier to understand.
Do you have a better understanding of how to improve your
persuasive copy using these techniques? Then let’s address one of
the biggest questions beginning copywriters ask.

51

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The Long and the Short of
Copywriting
by Brian Clark
They’re some of the most often-asked questions about copywriting.
Long or short copy, which works best? What about headlines — how
long should they be?
The correct answer usually drives people crazy, which is…
Whatever works.
Before you start throwing things at us, we’ll elaborate.

Headlines: 8 Words or Less, Except …
The traditional wisdom about headlines is that they should be short.
There are plenty of exceptions to this rule (including a big one we’ll
discuss below).
However, reviewing The 100 Greatest Advertisements by Julian
Lewis Watkins shows that 95% of the most effective headlines from

52

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

the early years of magazine copywriting were less than eight words.
But magazine copywriters had to worry about brevity due to space
concerns.
Studies done from the direct mail industry show that about 50% to
60% of the most effective headlines are eight words or less, leaving
ample indication that longer headlines work, too.
Now, here’s an exception that applies online. Perhaps you’ve seen
web sales letters or landing pages which have a headline that looks
like a short paragraph. These long headlines can’t possibly be
working, right?
Well, according to the eye-tracking study released by user-interface
expert Jakob Nielsen, webpage visitors read in an “F” pattern,
scrolling intently across the top of the page where the headline
should be, then making their way back again across the first
subhead, then down the left hand side of the page to see if anything
else is of interest.
This study verifies the 80/20 rules of headlines (see above). But it
also demonstrates that you might want to include more information
in your headline than 8 words can usually get across in an effort to
get the rest of the page read.

53

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

All in all though, short headlines are easier to scan and cannot be
missed.
My general rule of thumb is to write the shortest headline possible
that convincingly conveys a unique benefit to the reader so they’ll
read the body.
It’s not always easy, but it’s extremely important.

Long Copy vs. Short Copy
Does anyone read those long sales letters that go on and on?
Yes they do, and for many products, long copy outsells short copy
by a large margin. The basic rule of copy length is the same as
headlines – as long as necessary, but no longer.
The key is writing copy that’s interesting and informative to someone
who actually cares. But beyond that, there are some guidelines that
can help, so let’s see what the experts say.
Bob Bly says that the length of your copy will depend on three
things:

54

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• The Product: the more features and benefits a product has, 		
the longer the copy.
• The Audience: Certain people want as much information 		
as they can get before making a purchase. This is especially 		
true of people on the Internet, and especially true with 			
information products.
• The Purpose: What’s the goal? Generating a lead for a service
business requires less detail, but an ad that aims to make a sale 		
must overcome every objection the potential buyer may have.
Joe Sugarman says two factors increase the need for more copy:
• Price point: The higher the price, the more copy required to 		
justify or create the need.
• Unusual Item: The more unusual the product, the more you 		
need to relate that product to the user by clearly demonstrating
the benefits.
Michel Fortin sets forth four categories of products, with each
successive category requiring longer copy:

55

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Convenience products: Fills an immediate need, low price, 		
low thought, short copy.
• Shopping products: A little higher priced, more thought and 		
opportunity to “shop around,” a little longer copy.
• Specialty products: With exotic goods, luxury cars, expensive
jewelry, art, etcetera, longer copy is definitely needed.
• Unsought products: When people have never realized that 		
their lives were incomplete without your product, get ready to 		
write some lengthy copy.
Read Michel’s blog post here for an elaboration of his ideas about
the long copy vs. short copy debate. Great stuff.

Whatever Works
So, we come full circle. The guidelines set forth by these copywriting
pros can help, but the answer remains the same:
The length of your headline and your copy will depend on whatever
works for whatever you are selling.

56

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

And the only way to know what works is to test different approaches.
Test various headlines to see which works best at capturing attention
and communicating a benefit. Test the amount of information you
provide. Does more or less work better at producing the desired
action?
Ultimately, that’s the only answer that matters to you.

57

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

A Short Guide to Writing Good
Copy
by Kelton Reid
The term “style” is thrown around a lot by writers, but it’s a misnomer
for copywriters because “style” doesn’t work in the extremely short
attention economy of the internet.
Good copy isn’t necessarily “stylish,” but copy that establishes trust,
authority, builds relationships, and gets people talking, sharing, and
buying is in high demand. A lack of style is what makes it work, so
writers who master this “style” are sought after and revered.
Legendary ad man David Ogilvy was one of those sought-after
writers, and he said, “A good advertisement is one which sells the
product without drawing attention to itself.”
It sounds counterintuitive, but it holds up under pressure, and I’ll
explain why great content marketing is built on that exact premise.

58

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Clear communication is the key to
effective copy
Your best copy needs to be “display window clear,” and you need to
be out there every morning with your Windex to make sure it doesn’t
distract from the product or service you provide for your clients and
customers.
Every writer eventually reaches for a style guide to help them
craft clear copy, and there are countless helpful rulebooks and list
posts that offer writers advice about proper usage and consistent
language.
Copyblogger actually has its own internal style guide, and members
of the editorial crew often squabble about usage over (virtual)
martinis.
We are also big fans of the classic English guidebook, The Elements
of Style by Strunk & White.
In it, William Strunk advises writers,

59

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

“A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a paragraph
no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing 		
should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no 			
unnecessary parts. This requires not that the writer make all his
sentences short, or that he avoid all detail and treat his subjects
only in outline, but that every word tell.”
This is very solid advice for online publishers … that was written in
1918!

A copywriter comes to the rescue
It was actually famed writer E. B. White who updated professor
Strunk’s “little” 43 page English rulebook in 1959. White revived it
from scholastic obscurity to become what Time magazine has called
“one of the 100 best and most influential books written in English
since 1923.”
E. B. White was more than a revered journalist (contributor to the
New Yorker for 60 years), and award-winning children’s author
(Charlotte’s Web).

60

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

He honed his writing style as a copywriter in the 1920s, and
contributed what he learned to The Elements of Style re-issue in
chapter V, “An Approach to Style.”
It’s no secret why this revered text is so short, and so effective.
Mr. White edited the style guide with some reluctance, and was
quoted years later as saying,
“My role in the revival of Strunk’s book was a fluke — just 			
something I took on because I was not doing anything else at 		
the time. It cost me a year out of my life, so little did I know 		
about grammar.”

Make every word tell
White’s lack of grammatical knowledge did not prevent the guide
from becoming a bestseller for the better part of the last 50 years.
In interviews, White wanted to remind writers that rules are meant to
be broken, and that every writer has their own unique point of view
and voice.
Style results more from what a person is than from what he knows.

61

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Every writer can memorize rules — but how you get people’s
attention requires some creativity.
Don’t get too hung up on the rules, or your copy might end up
sucking, and that would break the first rule of Copyblogger.
What we present to you next is an annotated guide to effective
online copywriting “style.” This list is only a sampling of the vast
amount of knowledge available to online publishers and content
marketers, but it contains a few things that have helped us most
along the way.

1. Use common spelling
Flourishes and variations of common words distract your readers and
pull them out of the story you’re telling (unless your demographic is
girls aged 7-13).
Avoid:
• Pleez for please
• Thru for through
• Nite for night

62

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• 2moro for tomorrow
• @ for at
Tweets and text messages require some brevity, slang, and LOL
acronyms, but connecting with your audience in longer copy
requires fewer distractions.

2. Avoid hyperbole and fancy words
Sometimes, you will need to tone down your language.
Good copy cuts like a knife. When it’s action you’re after, avoid big
words that make you sound like you’re trying too hard to sound
smart or important.
E. B. White said it best,
“Do not be tempted by a twenty-dollar word, when there is a 		
ten-center handy.”

63

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

3. Put the reader first
It is our job as copywriters to tap into the hopes, dreams, and fears
of our audience. This requires research, and the magic of the word
“you.”
Proven to be one of the English language’s most powerful words,
you is a word that can’t lose.

4. Write in a natural way
You must speak the language of your audience, and do it in a way
that conveys you are a real person, with genuine interest in offering
your help and expertise.
How else are your prospects going to get to know, like, and trust
you? How else are search engines going to recognize that you have
the answers to people’s questions?
Research, research, research. Know your audience inside and out,
and understand the language they use when they speak about your
topic. Then use that language in your copy.

64

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

5. Work from an outline
Outlines work! If you don’t have the energy or time to sketch out a
simple AIDA outline, give yourself some idea of the goals you’d like
to accomplish.
Even something as simple as a post-it-note with a few bullet points
works. Successful writers use outlines — they’re helpful in reminding
you to stick to the point.

6. Write with nouns and verbs
Precise language convinces; flowery language distracts.
Concise and specific copy moves the prospect along, but adjectives
and adverbs are (often) just filler. The more descriptors you throw in
there, the higher the chances are that someone with the attention
span of a hummingbird will click away (unless you are describing the
features of something technical).

65

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

7. Revise and rewrite
World-class copywriter and advertising executive David Ogilvy is
quoted as saying,
“I am a lousy copywriter, but I am a good editor.”
He would edit his first draft four or five times before showing it to a
client, who would inevitably change it again.

8. Do not overwrite
Without clarity, your copy doesn’t stand a chance. Overwriting is a
symptom of underthinking. Good copy is damn hard to write.
“If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well 		
enough.” – Albert Einstein

9. Do not overstate
Superlatives have the power to wreck your copy.
When you overstate or exaggerate your claims (with things like
trumped-up testimonials), you risk losing the trust of your audience.

66

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

An understated promise often does a better job of capturing reader
attention than screaming hype does.

10. Don’t mix metaphors
If a product sings when used correctly, but sinks if used improperly,
then it is guilty of being both a songstress and an anchor, and this is
very distracting.
Stick to one metaphor or the other, but not both in one sentence.

11. Simplify your language
Make every word tell.
Delete the words that are just window dressing.

Need Some Examples?
If you need some examples of how to create good copy (that follows
the rules above), read on for 10 killer samples.

67

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

10 Ways to Write Damn Good
Copy
by Demian Farnworth
Writing effective copy is both an art and a science.
It’s an art because it requires creativity, a sense of beauty and
style — a certain aptitude, mastery, and special knowledge. Artistic
advertising allows you to create content marketing that’s not just
practical and persuasive, but aweinspiring and breathtaking.
Writing effective copy is also a science, because it exists in the world
of tests, trial and failure, improvement, breakthroughs, education,
and predictability.
Scientific advertising allows you to develop an idea, then test that
idea. It’s how you know if your content marketing is working.
In bad copy, one (or both) of these elements are missing. In good
copy, they are both abundant.
Read on, and we’ll explore ten examples of good copy living (and
selling) out in the wild …

68

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

1. Plain copy
The most basic approach to writing effective copy is to simply
introduce the product without gimmick or style. It’s a simple
presentation of the facts and benefits.
There is no story. There is no conversation. There is no “sizzle” and
no superlative claims.
Think Google Analytics.

69

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Google’s copy isn’t going to win any literary awards, but it will get
the job done.
It will give a prospect the information she needs to make an
informed decision about the product.

2. Storytelling copy
As we’ve talked about before — everyone loves a good story.
We like hearing about people (especially interesting people). We
want to know more about people who’ve suffered challenges we
can relate to, who can tell us how they overcame those challenges.
And the moral of the story, coincidentally, is that your product was
the catalyst to overcoming those odds.
You might find this storytelling technique in an email series, a landing
page, or a short video. Whatever the format, you’ll get four basic
traits in the story:
• Opening: Introduce the pain. Show how the character of the 		
story had a normal life, then how that life was shattered by 		
a change of events.

70

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

• Conflict: How is the life of the main character threatened if 		
he or she does not respond to the problem? What does 			
her journey look like as she tackles this challenge?
• Dialogue: People are drawn to conversations in a story. It’s 		
human interest at its root: two people talking to each other. We
are also drawn to dialogue because it’s easy to read.
• Solution: Finally, your product is introduced as the cure 			
for your character’s problem. You increase the 					
credibility of your product by sharing specific results 			
(347% increase in conversion, for example).
Your story doesn’t have to be dramatic — it just has to be interesting
to your target audience. And this is where good research comes in.

3. Conversational copy
John Caples calls conversational copy “You and Me.”
Write this style of copy like a conversation between two people: the
copywriter and the prospect.

71

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The language here would be no different than a salesman sitting
down for lunch with a customer and talking through a sales
presentation. It’s a straightforward approach that tries to identify with
the reader:
“I know how you feel. I felt the same way. That all changed when I
found x, y and z.”
Keep in mind that you don’t have to be a polished copywriter to
create effective conversational copy. Often your passion for the
product will come to life on the page.
In fact, you can record a conversation about the product, transcribe
that conversation, and use it as a rough draft. It’s an easy way to
create natural, conversational copy.

4. John Lennon copy
When John Lennon asked us to imagine there was no heaven or
hell, no countries, religion, or war, he was using an effective tool of
persuasion: imaginative copy.

72

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

As an advertiser, you can ask your target audience to imagine
a painless way to lose weight, or what it would feel like to be a
successful travel writer.
Imaginative copy typically begins with words like imagine, close
your eyes, pretend for a moment, discover, or picture this in the first
paragraph of the text.
This is the concept behind AWAI’s Barefoot Writer presentation.

73

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

In this example, you are asked to imagine your life in a certain way
— to picture what it would be like to live your dream, whatever that
dream might be.
Then the copywriter paints a picture of achieving that ideal life
through your product.

5. Long copy
The fundamental premise behind long copy is, “The more you
tell, the more you sell.” Ads that are long on facts and benefits will
convert well.
Unlike a face-to-face conversation with a salesperson, a written ad
has only one chance to convert a reader. If you get in front of the
reader, you’ve got to lay it all out on the table.
Take the Google Analytics example above.
Page after page of facts and benefits are presented because the
proposition isn’t simple — typical prospects are going to be asking a
lot of questions.
Better to anticipate those questions, and answer them in the copy.

74

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

But when you’re following the basic rules of content marketing that
works, remember that you don’t have to present all the facts and
benefits up front.
You can leak the presentation over a period of weeks through an
email autoresponder (like our Content series), or a registration-based
content library (like MyCopyblogger).
In this way, you’re turning long copy into short, easily-digestible
snippets.

6. Killer poet copy
Here at Copyblogger, we love Ernest Hemingway and David Sedaris,
but we aren’t so enamored by their writing abilities that we try to
imitate their styles at the expense of teaching and selling.
Our goal isn’t to convince our audience that we’re smart — it’s
educating and selling with our copy.
As David Ogilvy once said, “We sell, or else.” But we try to sell with
style. We try to balance the killer with the poet.

75

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Killer poet copy sees writing as a means to an end (making a sale),
and the ad as an end in itself (beautiful design and moving story).
In other words, the killer poet combines style with selling. Creativity
with marketing. Story with solution.

7. Direct-from-CEO copy
It’s a known fact — third-party endorsements can help you sell
products.
But it’s equally effective to position your selling argument as a direct
communication between the company founder and his or her
customer.
This down-to-earth approach levels the playing field. It telegraphs to
the customer, “See, the CEO isn’t some cold and remote figurehead
interested in profit only. He’s approachable and friendly. He cares
about us.”
Jeff Bezos of Amazon is a superb example:

76

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

77

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Notice this letter is conversational as well as plain: it’s a simple
statement of the facts and benefits between two people: Jeff and
you.

8. Frank copy
Some copy will explain the ugly truth about the product.
This approach doesn’t start with the jewels of your goods — it starts
with the warts.
When selling a car, you might point out the endless repairs that
need to be done — thin brake pads, leaky transmission, busted sway
bar, and inoperable dashboard — before you introduce the leather
seats, Monsoon stereo system, sun roof, brand-new tires, and
supercharged engine.
What you’re saying is this car will need a lot of TLC. You might even
go as far as to say, “Make no mistake here — there’s much work to be
done here.”
And here’s a curious thing: when you are honest and transparent
about product weaknesses, the customer trusts you.

78

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

When the reader trusts you, they will be considerably more likely to
believe you when you point out the good qualities of your product.

9. Superlative copy
There are also times when you can make outlandish claims.
Claims like (these are actual ads):
• A revolutionary material from this Nevada mine could make 		
investors a fortune in 2013
•“Stores across U.S. selling out of what some call a new 			
‘miracle’ diet fighter”
• Obey this one weird loophole to get car insurance as low as 		
$9
But you can only make extraordinary claims when you have the
proof to back it up. The evidence can be in statistics, testimonials, or
research — or preferably all three.
The problem with superlative copy is that it’s often hard to make
outlandish claims and not sound like you are hyping it up — so use
this type of copy sparingly.

79

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Generally, it’s good to follow the “Remove All Hype” policy.

10. Rejection copy
Rejection copy turns conventional wisdom on its head and tries to
discourage people from being interested in your product.
This type of copy is a direct challenge to the reader that leverages
the velvet rope approach — the idea that only an exclusive set of
people are invited to use a product.
The American Express Black Card is a good example here — this card
is reserved for the world’s wealthiest and most elite. The only way
you can get your hands on one is if you are invited.
Similarly, consider the dating site Beautiful People. If you want to be
part of this exclusive dating club made up of “beautiful” people, then
you have to be voted in by existing members:

80

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Potential rejection startles readers — they don’t expect to be turned
down, especially not from an advertiser.
This approach also keys into our sense of wanting to belong. It
generates that curiosity itch, and activates our pride. We think, “How
dare they say I might not be good enough to get into their club? I’ll
show them.”

81

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Conclusion
In the end, great copy often combines several of these techniques
into one ad.
The CEO of a company writes a conversational sales letter built
around a story about his passion for his product (whether it is
peaches or water pumps).
A copywriter writes a long rejection ad that explains why certain
people are excluded from receiving an invitation to dine at an
exclusive restaurant.
Or a Savile Row tailor writes a plain but elegant sales letter about his
suits, which have been worn by kings and presidents.
This is the art and science of copywriting.
Now that we’ve seen examples of great copywriting, let’s look at the
flip side — what does really bad copywriting look like?

82

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

7 Ways to Write Damn Bad
Copy
by Demian Farnworth
It’s obvious that creativity is an essential part of being a remarkable
writer.
But when a results-oriented writer and an image-oriented writer
each say the word “creative,” they are talking about two completely
different things.
The results-oriented writer emphasizes problem solving with clear,
concise, and compelling copy (for example: How do I demonstrate
that our product will solve our target customer’s problem?).
The image-oriented writer puts an emphasis on artistic, clever,
or humorous copy (for example: How can I demonstrate how
entertaining and crafty I am?).
With that in mind, here are seven kinds of copy you need to avoid
(with a little help from legendary copywriter John Caples).
Copywriters beware …

83

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

1. Lyrical
This is the type of copy that you see from someone who loves words
— long words in particular.
Words like jentacular (pertaining to breakfast), slubberdegullion (a
filthy slobbering person), and recumbentitbus (a knockdown blow).
This is the person whose grandmother squeezed her cheeks and
said, “You are our little wordsmith.” Whose English Literature cronies
would stroke their chins and say, “I think you’re on to something. Not
sure what, but you’re on to it.”
Let’s imagine this wordsmith works for Black & Decker. She is asked
to write sales copy for a cordless drill. It might look like this:
Wanted: a hollow place in a solid mass of hard, fibrous substance.
Carpenters, with one little boring unit made from the 22nd element
of the periodic table you can create a precise aperture in any piece
of wood. And, behold, with the ergonomic grip zone constraining is
done with amenity and gratification. Visit any one of our facilities if
you are predisposed to acquiring a unit.

84

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The only problem is this is a painful piece to read. Nobody knows
what you are talking about. It is a guessing game — and your
audience doesn’t have the patience to guess.

2. Sentimental
Sentimental copy sounds like it was written by a college student who
enjoys sunsets, foreign films, incense, and long bubble baths.
He is a copywriter with a single and solitary goal: to make you “feel”
the copy. If you don’t feel the copy, then he’s failed.
He stands in the door way — a tear hangs like a sapphire from his
eyelash, ready to plunge into the depths of his lonely and loveless
heart. You are drinking from the cup of the dark night, confused by
the decaying shadow of his love, dazed by the breath of a broken
promise. When he lowers the veil on your heart, you will fling
yourself into the depths of hunger and death.
Know what he’s trying to sell? Me neither.
That might work for a Nicholas Sparks novel, but never in advertising.
Shoot for the straight and the simple.

85

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

3. Outlandish
This is your garden variety snake-oil salesman.
• The product that will eliminate $45,000 in debt in less than 45
days!
• The DVD that swears you can look like a Russian body builder
with nothing more than a chair and four minutes a day!
• The stock that will make Google’s stock price look like a steal.
It’s the world of yellow highlight markers, images of jaw-dropping
tax returns and promises of endless freedom to indulge in every
whim.
But it’s also a world of broken dreams where you might make a mint
in the short term, but over time, your reputation will sour.
This type of advertising betrays confidence. It does harm. It stings,
and leaves a bad taste in our mouths. Sonia calls this the troll under
the bridge — and it’s a sure fire way to kill conversions.

86

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

It appears when we are young and suckered into the milk-can con
job at the traveling carnival. Or the Sea-Monkey hoax where you
are lead to believe you will spawn little people in an aquarium — but
what you end up with is just cheap fish food.
You feel stupid for falling for such tricks. You vow never to fall again.
You grow a thick skin to advertising. And every honest salesman and
every sincere sales page that crosses your path is viewed as a fraud.
There is a limit to credibility. A limit to what people will believe. If you
cross that invisible line in your sales copy, people will shut you down.
Better to make a promise that you know your audience will believe
without having to stretch their judgment. Better yet, tell the ugly
truth. What you say after that will be easier to swallow.

4. Humorous
The problem with humorous copy is that humor is fickle. It’s a
minefield. For every person who laughs at a blonde joke, you have
one person who hates you for it.
Some people like deadpan humor. Others like dark humor. Some like
slapstick.

87

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Still others like sarcasm. Many like bathroom humor while others
want the highbrow sort.
Unless you are absolutely certain that a majority of your paying
customers like dark humor, then don’t use it.
What you find funny is likely insulting to others — and that will
damage the effectiveness of your copy. That’s not a risk you should
be willing to take.
Of course, there are the rare exceptions. There are writers who
occasionally go down the absurd, clever, humorous route — and it
pays off.
Your chances, however, are much better if you stick to clear,
concise, and compelling copy. Or at the very least, avoid humor until
you’re certain you are actually funny.

5. Short
Short copy — so brief that the entire advertisement could fit on the
back of a business card — is bliss for those who use it.

88

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Think cologne producers or financial institutions. Sometimes an
entire page in a magazine is devoted to the name of the product,
plus an alluring slogan:
“Seduction is essential,” or “Your money is your money.”
Nobody knows what those slogans mean, not even the marketing
director. But it’s that mystery we love.
“Unfortunately, mysterious copy does not pay the bills.”
It goes against the grain of tested advertising methods that have
proven longer copy will virtually always outsell short copy.

6. Clever
Clever is what you get when you have a writer who thinks he is smart
— smarter than the average reader — and he’s out to prove how
smart he is.
So he writes the clever ad.
Clever is also what you get when you don’t have a marketing clue.
Let’s say you’re an architect selling the benefits of your firm, and you
write this headline:

89

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

“We will make sure that your house is not square.”
You meant “not cool” but, hey, look at you — you said it in a clever
way! Word play! Everyone in your firm thinks you are a genius!
Unfortunately, everyone else will think you are a moron for trying to
sell them a house that will one day flop over.
Few people actually read clever advertisements. They are confused
by the headline, and the few who do read recognize what you are
trying (and failing) to do.
If your job rides upon effective advertising, then make sure it
accomplishes these four things:
• Promises to solve a meaningful problem.
• Paints a picture of what your life will be like if that problem is 		
solved.
• Proves that you will deliver on your promise.
• Pushes the prospect to subscribe, download, donate, share or
buy.

90

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Effective content marketing builds upon the self-interest of your
customer.
And when you give them the kind of content they don’t want to
delete—you won’t need clever copywriting.

7. Advertorial
Once a popular and effective approach — used by some of the best
copywriters in the land — the advertorial is now overused (possibly
even flatout abused).
What exactly is an advertorial? It’s nothing more than an
advertisement dressed up to look like a piece of news.
Here’s what we see at the bottom of an article on one of our local
news websites:

91

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

In a box clearly marked “Advertisement” there is a handful of ads that
are supposed to be “news”: “Weird Illinois Loophole” or “New Policy
in Illinois.”
But what looks like an editorial news piece is clearly an ad:

In the lede, you have loaded language like “scammed” and
“overpaying,” to hit those hot buttons—so even if you miss the word
ADVERTISEMENT, readers will sense this is not really meant to
inform, but to persuade.
This approach is misleading — almost sleazy — and not unlike the
outlandish approach.

92

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

But here’s the thing — these ads have been running for a very long
time. That tells us two things:
• They are getting great clickthroughs
• They are making money
The question becomes: is there a better way to be profitable? We
think there is. It’s called content marketing.

Focus on your audience …
There’s one thing that all of the examples above share — a complete
lack of concern for the audience they intend to reach. In each
example the spotlight is put on the writer:
“Look at me, I am a poet. I am funny. Clever. Mysterious!”
Good copywriters, good advertising copy, and good content
marketing, however, put the focus on the audience, the prospective
customer. If you truly take care of your audience, they will eventually
take care of you.

93

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Nearly done!
We’re nearly done with our Copywriting 101 lessons — we’ve just
got one more for you. As a successful copywriter, there’s a practice
you will want to turn into a steady habit, and that’s learning from
other writers. You’ll find out how to draw inspiration from your peers,
teachers, compatriots and mentors.

94

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The #1 Secret to Writing Great
Copy Is ...
Using words that work with the people you’re trying to persuade.
Don’t reinvent the wheel. Study and draw inspiration from great copy
that works.
I’m not talking about copy that you personally think is great.
It’s a mistake to judge advertising like regular people do – as
entertainment. Madison Avenue has a great gig producing short
entertainment pieces called commercials that often don’t sell much
of anything.
I’m talking about drawing inspiration from advertising copy that has
demonstrated its effectiveness by actually working as intended. Like
a direct mail piece that has raked in millions and millions of dollars in
sales.

95

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Why Professional Copywriters Use Swipe
Files
A copywriting “swipe file” is a collection of winning ads. Sales letters,
space ads, headline collections, plus bits and pieces of copy that
have been marketplace proven to make big money. A carefullycollected swipe file is the essential starting point for most new
copywriting campaigns.
It’s a bit like why lawyers begin with a basic form when drafting a
new legal document, or why web designers start with a basic code
structure. Start with something solid, and customize from there.
The problem with the swipe file approach is context. Many new and
inexperienced writers (and often many pros) will miss the mark when
trying to adapt past copy to a new situation.
Yep . . . the winning formula becomes a bust when inappropriately
applied.

96

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

The Art of Listening
Luckily, we’ve got an impressive set of new tools that will let us
uncover the context, right down to the very language our prospects
are using.
Most marketers make the mistake of thinking social media is a tool
for talking. They believe it’s for distributing a message far and wide,
and measuring the response that comes back.
It’s true that the internet is a direct response playground. Marketers
haven’t had this clear a picture of their buyers since the days of the
bazaar. But the social web is also the most powerful market research
tool you’ll ever use.
Sites like Twitter and Facebook can tell you the exact words your
prospects are using to describe their wishes, hopes, fears, worries,
and dissatisfactions.
And the words people use when searching for information makes
keyword research a goldmine that goes way beyond SEO.

97

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Email marketing and blogs allow your prospects to engage you in a
conversation, to tell you what they want and how they want it, and
just as important, to demonstrate what they respond to.

The Right Words, in the Right Context
The swipe file still has a place, and smart copywriters still maintain
them. (Though they may have more headlines from Google Adwords
than from direct mail these days.)
But the most effective copywriters also remember that classic piece
of wisdom from Grandma:
“You have two ears and one mouth. Listen twice as much as 		
you talk.”

98

CO PY W RI TI N G 1 0 1 - H OW TO C R AF T COM PEL L I N G COPY

Where You Can Go From Here
As content marketers, we need a veritable arsenal of skills.
• We need to know how to perform effective research.
• We have to be world-class experts in our industries.
• We must know how to connect with our readers.
But of all our skills, copywriting may just be the most important.
Because as content marketers, we’re in the business of selling
something. It might be high-end consulting services, or could be
a fantastic line of t-shirts and sweatshirts. No matter what we’re
selling, we must be able to persuade people to buy.
Copywriting skills truly separate the wheat from the chaff in the
land of content marketers, and hopefully we’ve given you a good
crash course on how to hone and perfect your persuasive writing
methods.

99

